[Doc] Draft release notes for 1.5 (#1655)
grafana/tempo: docs/tempo/website/release-notes/v1-5.md

such as the [Application Performance Management (APM) dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/app-performance-mgmt/) which visualizes span metrics (traces data for rates, error rates, and durations (RED)) and service graphs.

>**Note**: For a complete list of changes and enhancements, refer to the [Tempo 1.5 changelog](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/releases). 

## Features and enhancements

Version 1.5 contains the following features and enhancements. 

### Apache Parquet block format support

Tempo now supports a columnar block format for trace storage based on [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/).
We're excited about this new format because it will enable increased speed and efficiency for Tempo search. It also allows users to leverage the large ecosystem of existing Parquet tools and libraries to process and transform their trace data.

We're releasing the Parquet block format as experimental in Tempo 1.5, with plans to move it to stable in a future release once we've had more opportunity to test it. 

> The new Parquet block format can be used as a drop-in replacement for Tempo's existing block format. No data conversion or upgrade process is necessary. As soon as the Parquet format is enabled, Tempo starts writing data in that format, leaving existing data as-is. 

Author: ```suggestion
The new Parquet block format can be used as a drop-in replacement for Tempo's existing block format. 
No data conversion or upgrade process is necessary. 
As soon as the Parquet format is enabled, Tempo starts writing data in that format, leaving existing data as-is. 
For more information, refer to the [Parquet documentation]({{< relref "../configuration/parquet/" >}}).
```

---
title: V1.5
weight: 70
---

# Version 1.5 release notes

The Tempo team is pleased to announce the release of Tempo 1.5.

With this release, Tempo adds Parquet block support (experimental), anonymous usage reporting to help the Tempo team and Grafana understand how Tempo is used, and enhancements to the metrics-generator. 

> In addition to the items detailed below, the [application performance management (APM) dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/app-performance-mgmt/) visualizes span metrics (traces data for rates, error rates, and durations (RED)) and service graphs in Grafana 9.1.

Author: ```suggestion
We encourage users to upgrade to Grafana 9.1 to see additional Tempo-powered capabilities. 
In addition to the items detailed below, the [application performance management (APM) dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/app-performance-mgmt/) visualizes span metrics (traces data for rates, error rates, and durations (RED)) and service graphs in Grafana 9.1.
```

## Features and enhancements

Version 1.5 contains the following features and enhancements. 

> ### Metrics-generator enhancements
> 
> The [metrics-generator]({{< relref "../metrics-generator/" >}}) now includes databases and requests across messaging systems in service graph metrics. 
> The OpenTelemetry semantic conventions are used to detect when a span is involved in one of these systems. [PR 1576](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1576)
> 
> In addition, metrics-generator supports per-tenant processor configuration. [PR 1434](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1434)
> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

### Apache Parquet block format support

Tempo now has a columnar block format based on Apache Parquet.
A columnar block format may result in improved search performance and also enables a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data.

This feature is experimental.

While Parquet can be used as a drop-in replacement, Parquet requires more CPU and memory resources.
No data conversion or upgrade process is necessary.
Once Parquet is enabled, Tempo starts writing new data in the new format.
Existing data are left as-is. 

To use Parquet, set the block format option to `vParquet` in the configuration file.
Refer to the [Configuration documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/#storage) for more information.

```yaml
# block format version. options: v2, vParquet
[version: <string> | default = v2]
```

For more information, refer to the [Parquet design document](https://github.com/mdisibio/tempo/blob/design-proposal-parquet/docs/design-proposals/2022-04%20Parquet.md) and [Issue 1480](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/issues/1480).

> 

Author: ```suggestion

### Metrics-generator enhancements

The [metrics-generator]({{< relref "../metrics-generator/" >}}) now includes databases and requests across messaging systems in service graph metrics. 
The OpenTelemetry semantic conventions are used to detect when a span is involved in one of these systems. [PR 1576](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1576)

In addition, metrics-generator supports per-tenant processor configuration. [PR 1434](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1434)

```

> ### Usage reporting

Author: ```suggestion
### Anonymous usage reporting
```

   The old histogram metric name in Tempo 1.4.x:
   ```
   traces_spanmetrics_duration_seconds_{sum,count,bucket}
   ```
   New metric name:
   ```
   traces_spanmetrics_latency_{sum,count,bucket}
   ```
   Additionally, the default label `span_status` is renamed to `status_code`.

- [PR 1556](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1556) Jsonnet users will need to specify ephemeral storage requests and limits for the metrics generator.
   ```
    _config+:: {
      metrics_generator+: {
        ephemeral_storage_request_size: '10Gi',
        ephemeral_storage_limit_size: '11Gi',
      },
    }
   ```

- [PR 1465](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1481) Anonymous usage reporting has been added. Distributors and metrics generators will now require permissions to object storage equivalent to compactors and ingesters. This feature is enabled by default but can be disabled easily.

- [PR 1558](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1558) Deprecated metrics `tempodb_(gcs|s3|azure)_request_duration_seconds` have been removed in favor of `tempodb_backend_request_duration_seconds`. These metrics have been deprecated since v1.1.

> 
> > **Note**: For a complete list of changes and enhancements, refer to the [Tempo 1.5 changelog](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/releases). 
> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

---
title: V1.5
weight: 70
---

# Version 1.5 release notes

The Tempo team is pleased to announce the release of Tempo 1.5.

With this release, Tempo adds Parquet block support (experimental), anonymous usage reporting to help the Tempo team and Grafana understand how Tempo is used, and enhancements to the metrics-generator. 

We encourage users to upgrade to Grafana 9.1 to see additional Tempo-powered capabilities,
such as the [application performance management (APM) dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/app-performance-mgmt/) which visualizes span metrics (traces data for rates, error rates, and durations (RED)) and service graphs.

>**Note**: For a complete list of changes and enhancements, refer to the [Tempo 1.5 changelog](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/releases). 

## Features and enhancements

Version 1.5 contains the following features and enhancements. 

### Apache Parquet block format support

Tempo now has a columnar block format based on Apache Parquet.

> A columnar block format may result in improved search performance and also enables a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're excited about this new format because it will enable increased speed and efficiency for Tempo search. It also allows users to leverage the large ecosystem of existing Parquet tools and libraries to process and transform their trace data.
```

Reviewer: I just felt like we were underselling the excitement here with 'may result'. I'm guessing we wouldn't have bothered to do Parquet if we only thought this was a possibility.

> This feature is experimental.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're releasing the Parquet block format as experimental in Tempo 1.5, with plans to move it to stable in a future release once we've had more opportunity to test it. 
```

> While Parquet can be used as a drop-in replacement, Parquet requires more CPU and memory resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new Parquet block format can be used as a drop-in replacement for Tempo's existing block format. No data conversion or upgrade process is necessary. As soon as the Parquet format is enabled, Tempo starts writing data in that format, leaving existing data as-is. 
```

Reviewer: I assume that both types of data are queryable? Like you suddenly don't lose the ability to query your traces in the old non-parquet format? Maybe we should state that explicitly?

Author: That's my understanding.

> No data conversion or upgrade process is necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Once Parquet is enabled, Tempo starts writing new data in the new format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Existing data are left as-is. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note, however, that enabling the Parquet block format means Tempo will require more CPU and memory resources than it previously did. 
```

Reviewer: Do we have any sort of estimate? This feels vague.

To use Parquet, set the block format option to `vParquet` in the configuration file.
Refer to the [Configuration documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/#storage) for more information.

```yaml
# block format version. options: v2, vParquet
[version: <string> | default = v2]
```

For more information, refer to the [Parquet design document](https://github.com/mdisibio/tempo/blob/design-proposal-parquet/docs/design-proposals/2022-04%20Parquet.md) and [Issue 1480](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/issues/1480).

### Metrics-generator enhancements

The [metrics-generator]({{< relref "../metrics-generator/" >}}) now includes databases and requests across messaging systems in service graph metrics. 
The OpenTelemetry semantic conventions are used to detect when a span is involved in one of these systems. [PR 1576](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1576)

In addition, metrics-generator supports per-tenant processor configuration. [PR 1434](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1434)

### Anonymous usage reporting
  

> By default, Tempo will report anonymous usage data about the shape of a deployment to Grafana Labs. This data is used to determine how common the deployment of certain features are, if a feature flag has been enabled, replication factor or compression levels, etc.

Reviewer 2: Not currently.  I can write something up if we want that in the release notes, but perhaps we can wait.  We did file an issue for us to follow up and add an endpoint like `/status/usage` that would dump the payload to the user so they can see what is in place.

> By default, Tempo will report anonymous usage data about the shape of a deployment to Grafana Labs. This data is used to determine how common the deployment of certain features are, if a feature flag has been enabled, replication factor or compression levels, etc.

Reviewer: Since the release is already public, I'd rather not hold up the release notes further. Doing it as a follow up bit of work is fine.

## Upgrade considerations

When upgrading to Tempo v1.5, be aware of these breaking changes:

- [PR 1478](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1478) To build advanced visualization features into Grafana, we have decided to change our spanmetric names to match OpenTelemetry (OTel) conventions. Any functionality added to Grafana will work whether you use Tempo, Grafana Agent, or the OTel Collector to generate metrics.
   The old histogram metric name in Tempo 1.4.x:
   ```
   traces_spanmetrics_duration_seconds_{sum,count,bucket}
   ```
   New metric name:
   ```
   traces_spanmetrics_latency_{sum,count,bucket}
   ```
   Additionally, the default label `span_status` is renamed to `status_code`.

- [PR 1556](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1556) Jsonnet users will need to specify ephemeral storage requests and limits for the metrics generator.
   ```
    _config+:: {
      metrics_generator+: {
        ephemeral_storage_request_size: '10Gi',
        ephemeral_storage_limit_size: '11Gi',
      },
    }
   ```

> - [PR 1465](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1481) Anonymous usage reporting has been added. Distributors and metrics generators will now require permissions to object storage equivalent to compactors and ingesters. This feature is enabled by default but can be disabled easily.

Author: It should be 1481. Good catch!

- [PR 1558](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1558) Deprecated metrics `tempodb_(gcs|s3|azure)_request_duration_seconds` have been removed in favor of `tempodb_backend_request_duration_seconds`. These metrics have been deprecated since v1.1.

## Bug fixes

### 1.5.0 bug fixes

Version 1.5.0 includes the following fixes: 

- [PR 1441](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1441) Fixed nil pointer panic when the trace by id path errors.

> - [PR 1472](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1472) Updated Tempo microservices Helm values example which missed the 'enabled' key for thriftHttp.

Author: That should be the correct markup.

> - [PR 1468](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1468) Fix race condition in forwarder overrides loop.

Author: ```suggestion
- [PR 1468](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1468) Fixed race condition in forwarder overrides loop.
```

---
title: V1.5
weight: 70
---

# Version 1.5 release notes

> The Tempo team is pleased to announce the release of Tempo 1.5.

Author: ```suggestion
The Tempo team is pleased to announce the release of Tempo 1.5.

With this release, Tempo adds Parquet block support (experimental), anonymous usage reporting to help the Tempo team and Grafana understand how Tempo is used, and enhancements to the metrics-generator. 
```

## Features and enhancements

Version 1.5 contains the following features and enhancements. 

### Metrics-generator enhancements

The [metrics-generator]({{< relref "../metrics-generator/" >}}) now includes databases and requests across messaging systems in service graph metrics. 
The OpenTelemetry semantic conventions are used to detect when a span is involved in one of these systems. [PR 1576](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1576)

### Apache Parquet block format support

Tempo now has a columnar block format based on Apache Parquet.
A columnar block format has many advantages within Tempo such as enabling faster search but also downstream by enabling a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data.

Parquet fits all of the requirements:

* Roundtrippable - Support for hierarchical data means regenerating OTLP is straightformat

* More efficient - only read the columns needed for the search

* Faster - only read the columns needed

> * Similar or better block size - Current prototype has ~5% smaller block size for parquet

Author: ```suggestion
* Similar or better block size - About a ~5% smaller block size for parquet
```

* Object storage - Parquet is a file-based approach which translates well to Tempo's block-based design

* Shardable - Parquet naturally includes sub-block structures such as row groups and column chunks which can be processed independently.

This feature is experimental.

> For more information, refer to the [Parquet design document](https://github.com/mdisibio/tempo/blob/design-proposal-parquet/docs/design-proposals/2022-04%20Parquet.md). [Issue 1480](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/issues/1480)

Author: ```suggestion
For more information, refer to the [Parquet design document](https://github.com/mdisibio/tempo/blob/design-proposal-parquet/docs/design-proposals/2022-04%20Parquet.md) and [Issue 1480](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/issues/1480).
```

---
title: V1.5
weight: 70
---

# Version 1.5 release notes

The Tempo team is pleased to announce the release of Tempo 1.5.

With this release, Tempo adds Parquet block support (experimental), anonymous usage reporting to help the Tempo team and Grafana understand how Tempo is used, and enhancements to the metrics-generator. 

In addition to the items detailed below, the [application performance management (APM) dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/app-performance-mgmt/) visualizes span metrics (traces data for rates, error rates, and durations (RED)) and service graphs in Grafana 9.1.

## Features and enhancements

Version 1.5 contains the following features and enhancements. 

### Metrics-generator enhancements

> The [metrics-generator]({{< relref "../metrics-generator/" >}}) now includes databases and requests across messaging systems in service graph metrics. 
> The OpenTelemetry semantic conventions are used to detect when a span is involved in one of these systems. [PR 1576](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1576)
> 

Author: ```suggestion
The [metrics-generator]({{< relref "../metrics-generator/" >}}) now includes databases and requests across messaging systems in service graph metrics. 
The OpenTelemetry semantic conventions are used to detect when a span is involved in one of these systems. [PR 1576](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1576)

In addition, metrics-generator supports per-tenant processor configuration. [PR 1434](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1434)

```

### Apache Parquet block format support

Tempo now has a columnar block format based on Apache Parquet.

> A columnar block format may result in improved search performance and also enables a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data."

Author: ```suggestion
A columnar block format may result in improved search performance and also enables a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data.
```

This feature is experimental.

While Parquet can be used as a drop-in replacement, Parquet requires more CPU and memory resources.
No data conversion or upgrade process is necessary.
Once Parquet is enabled, Tempo starts writing new data in the new format.
Existing data are left as-is. 

> To use Parquet, set the block format  option to `vParquet` in the configuration file.

Author: ```suggestion
To use Parquet, set the block format option to `vParquet` in the configuration file.
```

   The old histogram metric name in Tempo 1.4.x:
   ```
   traces_spanmetrics_duration_seconds_{sum,count,bucket}
   ```
   New metric name:
   ```
   traces_spanmetrics_latency_{sum,count,bucket}
   ```
   Additionally, the default label `span_status` is renamed to `status_code`.

- [PR 1556](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1556) Jsonnet users will need to specify ephemeral storage requests and limits for the metrics generator.
   ```
    _config+:: {
      metrics_generator+: {
        ephemeral_storage_request_size: '10Gi',
        ephemeral_storage_limit_size: '11Gi',
      },
    }
   ```

- [PR 1465](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1481) Anonymous usage reporting has been added. Distributors and metrics generators will now require permissions to object storage equivalent to compactors and ingesters. This feature is enabled by default but can be disabled easily.

- [PR 1558](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1558) Deprecated metrics `tempodb_(gcs|s3|azure)_request_duration_seconds` have been removed in favor of `tempodb_backend_request_duration_seconds`. These metrics have been deprecated since v1.1.

> ## Enhancements
> 
> - [PR 1421](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1421) Added the ability to have a per tenant max search duration.
> 
> - [PR 1471](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1471) metrics-generator: expose `max_active_series` as a metric.
> 
> - [PR 1457](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1457) Azure Backend: Added support for authentication with Managed Identities.  
> 
> - [PR 1459](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1459) Added a metric to track feature enablement
> 
> - [PR 1470](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1470) Added S3 config option `insecure_skip_verify`
> 
> - [PR 1518](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1518) Added polling option to reduce issues in Azure `blocklist_poll_jitter_ms`.
> 
> - [PR 1484](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1484) Add a config to query single ingester instance based on trace id hash for Trace By ID API.
> 
> - [PR 1519](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1519) Added blocklist metrics for total backend objects and total backend bytes.
> 
> - [PR 1558](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1558) Added `tempo_querier_external_endpoint_hedged_roundtrips_total` to count the total hedged requests.
> 
> - [PR 1442](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1442) Added tags option for S3 backends. This allows new objects to be written with the configured tags.
> 
> - [PR 1434](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1434) metrics-generator: support per-tenant processor configuration.
> 
> - [PR 1456](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1456) Included the rollout dashboard.
> 
> - [PR 1463](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1463) Added SentinelPassword configuration for Redis.
>  
> - [PR 1631](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1631) Added support for time picker in the Jaeger query plugin.
> 
> ## Changes
> 
> - [PR 1439](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1439) metrics-generator: Added the metric label `instance` to `__metrics_gen_instance` to reduce collisions with custom dimensions.
> 
> - [PR 1447](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1447) `max_bytes_per_tag_values_query` is not enforced when set to 0.
> 
> - [PR 1474](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1474) Added new querier service in deployment Jsonnet to serve `/status` endpoint.
> 
> - [PR 1483](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1483) Swapped out Google Cloud Functions serverless docs and build for Google Cloud Run.
> 
> - [PR 1504](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1504) Updated to Go 1.18.
> 
> - [PR 1517](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1517) Changed tag/value lookups to return partial results when reaching response size limit instead of failing.
> 
> - [PR 1547](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/issues/1547) Changed search to be case-sensitive.
> 
> - [PR 1566](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1566) Relaxed Hedged request defaults for external endpoints.
>    ```
>    querier:
>        search:
>          external_hedge_requests_at: 4s    -> 8s
>          external_hedge_requests_up_to: 3  -> 2
>    ```
> 
> - [PR 1593](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1593) Added two additional latency buckets to the default settings for generated spanmetrics. This change will increase cardinality when using the defaults.
> 
> - [PR 1465](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1465) Marked `log_received_traces` as deprecated. The new flag is `log_received_spans`. Extended distributor spans logger with optional features to include span attributes and a filter by error status.

Author: ```suggestion

> **Note**: For a complete list of changes and enhancements, refer to the [Tempo 1.5 changelog](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/releases). 
```

## Features and enhancements

Version 1.5 contains the following features and enhancements. 

### Metrics-generator enhancements

The [metrics-generator]({{< relref "../metrics-generator/" >}}) now includes databases and requests across messaging systems in service graph metrics. 
The OpenTelemetry semantic conventions are used to detect when a span is involved in one of these systems. [PR 1576](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1576)

### Apache Parquet block format support

Tempo now has a columnar block format based on Apache Parquet.
A columnar block format has many advantages within Tempo such as enabling faster search but also downstream by enabling a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data.

Parquet fits all of the requirements:

* Roundtrippable - Support for hierarchical data means regenerating OTLP is straightformat

* More efficient - only read the columns needed for the search

* Faster - only read the columns needed

* Similar or better block size - About a ~5% smaller block size for parquet

* Object storage - Parquet is a file-based approach which translates well to Tempo's block-based design

> * Shardable - Parquet naturally includes sub-block structures such as row groups and column chunks which can be processed independently.

Reviewer 2: Nit.  Consistency around using a period on these bullets.

Author: ```suggestion
* Shardable - Parquet naturally includes sub-block structures such as row groups and column chunks which can be processed independently
```

Author: Fixed. Thank you for the catch.

> This feature is experimental.

Reviewer 2: Do we have a pointer on where to turn this on if folks want to experiment?

Author: Added information to the release notes on Parquet. I'm also going to write a summary of Parquet for the docs so we'll have something there.

> This feature is experimental.

Author: ```suggestion
This feature is experimental.

While Parquet can be used as a drop-in replacement, Parquet requires more CPU and memory resources.
No data conversion or upgrade process is necessary.
Once Parquet is enabled, Tempo starts writing new data in the new format.
Existing data is left as-is. 

To use Parquet, set the block format  option to `vParquet` in the configuration file. 

```yaml
# block format version. options: v2, vParquet
[version: <string> | default = v2]
```

In addition to the items detailed below, the [application performance management (APM) dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/metrics-generator/app-performance-mgmt/) visualizes span metrics (traces data for rates, error rates, and durations (RED)) and service graphs in Grafana 9.1.

## Features and enhancements

Version 1.5 contains the following features and enhancements. 

### Metrics-generator enhancements

The [metrics-generator]({{< relref "../metrics-generator/" >}}) now includes databases and requests across messaging systems in service graph metrics. 
The OpenTelemetry semantic conventions are used to detect when a span is involved in one of these systems. [PR 1576](https://github.com/grafana/tempo/pull/1576)

### Apache Parquet block format support

Tempo now has a columnar block format based on Apache Parquet.
A columnar block format has many advantages within Tempo such as enabling faster search but also downstream by enabling a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data.

Parquet fits all of the requirements:

> * Roundtrippable - Support for hierarchical data means regenerating OTLP is straightformat

Author: ```suggestion
* Roundtrippable - support for hierarchical data means regenerating OTLP is straightformat
```

> Tempo now has a columnar block format based on Apache Parquet.
> A columnar block format has many advantages within Tempo such as enabling faster search but also downstream by enabling a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data.
> 
> Parquet fits all of the requirements:
> 
> * Roundtrippable - support for hierarchical data means regenerating OTLP is straightformat
> 
> * More efficient - only read the columns needed for the search
> 
> * Faster - only read the columns needed
> 
> * Similar or better block size - About a ~5% smaller block size for parquet
> 
> * Object storage - Parquet is a file-based approach which translates well to Tempo's block-based design
> 
> * Shardable - Parquet naturally includes sub-block structures such as row groups and column chunks which can be processed independently
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Tempo now has a columnar block format based on Apache Parquet.
A columnar block format may result in improved search performance and also enables a large ecosystem of tools access to the underlying trace data."

```
